docs(adr-13): Block Data Sync Overhaul: Part II - Network (#1326)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-013-blocksync-overhaul-part-2.md

# ADR #011: Block Data Sync Overhaul: Part II - Network

## Changelog

## Authors

@Wondertan

## Glossary

- LN - Light Node
- FN - Full Node
- BN - Bridge Node
- [EDS(Extended Data Square)](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/master/extendeddatasquare.go#L10) - plain Block
  data omitting headers and other block metadata.
- ODS - Original Data Square or the first quadrant of the EDS. Contains real user data and padding.
- Recent EDS - Newly produced EDS coming from the Core consensus network

## Context

This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul. The previous document(TODO: Link) described design for the
storage subsystem of the new BlockSync, while the Part II focuses on the networking.

The design drastically speeds up ODS retrieval over the network. The main goal is to make block syncing faster than

> block production for the max EDS size 256 for both past and recent EDSes.

Author: It's about EDS size, not the share size

### Design Assumptions

- No pruning.

- All the nodes are part of the same network and bootstrapped with common set of peers.

### Key Design Decisions

- __Use protobuf schema for Protocol(TODO Link) message (de)serialization.__ Protobuf is a common (de)serialization
standard which is already used in celestia-node. Even thought there are better alternatives, their benefits are 
negligible comparing with continuing Protobuf usage for consistency and simplicity.

- __Extend implemented `eds.Retriever`(TODO Link).__ Current `eds.Retriever` API already provides means to get data from the network,
while the extension provides an efficient happy path to get the EDS in more efficient manner. Additionally, Retriever is
extended to get data by namespace.

- __Leverage implemented discovery mechanism outlined in ADR-008(TODO Link).__ Discovery allows FN/LNs to find peers in
the __full node__ subnetwork. The subnetwork consists of FNs and BNs which can consume and serve EDSes or namespaced 
data contained in those. The LNs are connected to some nodes in the subnetwork, but are considered as passive 

> participants and do not serve anything.

Author: I change to EDS data

# ADR #011: Block Data Sync Overhaul: Part II - Network

## Authors

@Wondertan @renenay

> This ADR took a while to get through all the necessary details. Special thanks to awesome @renenay for dozens of
> deep dive call, note-taking, thoughts and ideas.
> Similarly, the time was spent on the experiments with the format of the documents was refactored 3 times.

## Glossary

- LN - Light Node
- FN - Full Node
- BN - Bridge Node
- Core Network - Consensus Network of Validators/Proposers producing new Celestia Blocks
- [EDS(Extended Data Square)](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/master/extendeddatasquare.go#L10) - plain Block
  data omitting headers and other block metadata
- ODS - Original Data Square or the first quadrant of the EDS. Contains real user data and padding
- Recent EDS - Newly produced EDS coming from the Core consensus network
- ND - Namespaced data/shares. Constitutes EDS

## Overview

> This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul design. The previous document(TODO: Link) described design for the

Reviewer: permaling for: https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/main/docs/adr/adr-11-blocksync-overhaul.md ?

> This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul design. The previous document(TODO: Link) described design for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul design. The previous document(TODO: Link) described a design for the
```

storage subsystem of the new block synchronization protocol of Celestia's Data Availability network, while the Part II
focuses on the networking.

> The new design drastically speeds up EDS retrieval in __happy path__ by streaming ODS as a single file and recomputing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new design drastically speeds up EDS retrieval in the __happy path__ by streaming ODS as a single file and recomputing
```

parity data forming EDS. Similar approach is taken for ND retrieval. The main goal is to make EDS and ND retrieval
consistently outpace EDS production for the max EDS size for historical and recent EDSes.

> The existing EDS retrieval logic(TODO: Link something) remains a __fallback path__, if the __happy path__ fails due to lack of connected

Reviewer: Will these todos addressed here or in followup PRs? I think it should be in this PR fwiw.

peers or the coordinated data withholding attack. With the __fallback path__ retrieval leverages all connected peers,
including LNs, and granulary requests EDS pieces - __shares__, increasing the likelihood of EDS reconstruction, while
paying a slower retrieval time price.

## Decision

The decision is to design three protocols:
- [`ShrEx/EDS`](#ShrEx/EDS Protocol) - Pull-based EDS retrieval protocol
- 
- [`ShrEx/ND`](#ShrEx/ND Protocol) - Pull-based ND retrieval protocol
- 

> - [`ShrEx/Sub`](#ShrEx/Sub Protocol) - Push-based _notification_ protocol for the newly produced EDSes

Reviewer: Nit: Are these supposed to be links instead? Otherwise, this can be written less redundantly. E.g.:
`ShrEx/EDS`: Pull-based EDS retrieval protocol.

Even more minor nit: consistently use `ShrEx/EDS` or ShrEx/EDS in text below.

- __Use [protobuf][proto] schema for protocol(TODO Link) message (de)serialization.__ Protobuf is a common (de)serialization
standard which is already used in celestia-node. Even thought there are better alternatives, their benefits are
negligible comparing with continuing Protobuf usage for consistency and simplicity.

- __FN/LNs keep existing EDS retrieval logic(TODO Link?).__ `celestia-node` already provides means to get EDS from
the network. It is slower than block production for the EDS sizes __>128__, but has higher retrieval guarantees during
data withholding attack. (link)

- __FN/LN/BNs leverage implemented discovery mechanism outlined in ADR-008(TODO Link).__ The discovery in a node maintains connections
with FN-subnetwork. This ensures the node will receive new notifications from `ShrEx/Sub` and can request data via
`ShrEx/EDS` and `ShrEx/ND`.

- __FN/BNs notify connected LN/FNs when they are ready to serve a recent EDS using via [`ShrEx/Sub`](#ShrEx/Sub Protocol).__
This lazy-push approach provides reliable EDS dissemination properties and turns out to be simpler than technics similar
to Bitswap's wantlist.(TODO link)

## Protocols Specs

> ### ShrEx/EDS Protocol

Reviewer 2: This section should make it more clear that only the ODS + CAR header are being sent over the wire, and the client verifies + creates the EDS from it upon successful retrieval. This is mentioned later in the document, but here it isn't clear that we aren't sending the full EDS. 

I would also vote for changing the names of the req/res to `ODSRequest` and `ODSResponse`

ShrEx/EDS is a pull-based protocol with client-server model, where LNs are clients, BNs are servers
and FNs are both. The protocol has only one request-response interaction followed by EDS stream.

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Author: > Is it because EDS data will use a different encoder from proto?

Yes. we could put the bytes field into the response, but that would require us to read the whole EDS in mem.

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Author: > Or there is valid scenario when client takes OK response, but terminates data stream?

Interesting case. This is a scenario of a bad client, I'll add the `Misbehavior` section to the protocol and elaborate on it.

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Author: We might want to do something about this case if the data stream is terminated repeatedly. If it happens one time only, that might be any kind of externality, like a laptop that went out of battery.

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Author: This misbehavior is more like a DDoS case, where a pretty valid client just spams us with the correct requests and then cuts the stream, not sure if we want to solve this issue in this particular case or we may come up with more generalized solution with the whole libp2p community

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Reviewer 3: Thank you for answer. I agree that sending large chunk of data by single proto message is not a good idea. 

I think possible attack vector could be mostly mitigated by setting proper server side write deadlines.

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message EDSRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the requested EDS.
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {
  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found

>   REFUSED = 201; // request refused

Reviewer 4: same here (refer to ND comment)

}

message EDSResponse {
  Status status = 1;
}
```

#### Streaming

After flushing `EDSResponse`, server starts streaming EDS file to client over the libp2p stream.

#### Backpressure

The streaming part of the protocol does not provide any mechanics for backpressure and offloads them to layer below.
Client-side buffer with reasonable default size may still be added.

[Backpressure][backpressure-quic] is inherited from the QUIC. The underlying default reliable transport and stream
multiplexing protocol used in `celestia-node`.

The common TCP transport and yamux multiplexer combination, does not provide reliable backpressure on stream level,
unlike QUIC. Therefore, using TCP+yamux is not recommended and may lead to unexpected stream and connections resets in case of highly
congested links.

#### Flow

// TODO Make a simple sequence diagram

### ShrEx/ND Protocol

ShrEx/ND is a pull-based protocol with client-server model, where LNs are clients and BNs/FNs are servers.
The protocol has only one request-response interaction to get all the data/shares addressed by namespace

> The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

Author: Fixed

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message NDRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the EDS to get ND from
  bytes namespace = 2; // namespace of ND
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {
  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found

>   REFUSED = 201; // request refused

Reviewer 4: confusing, why not

OK 0
NOT_FOUND 1
REFUSED 2

Author: I followed the HTTP codes pattern. Don't have a strong opinion on this

}

message NDResponse {
  Status status = 1;
  bytes  data = 2;

>   bytes  proof = 3;

Author: Good catch!

>   bytes  proof = 3;

Author: I mean, the idea was to encode al the rows in one data field, but it's better to explicitly separate them. And also, I forgot about the start/end thingy, even though we talk over about it multiple times.

>   bytes  proof = 3;

Author: Fixed

data via `das.Daser` from the network through `share.Availability` interface. However, there is no guarantee that upon the
new `ExtendedHeader` any of the Node's peers will have the data downloaded and ready to be served. That is, gossiping
of `ExtendedHeader` outpaces fetching of EDS data.

To overcome the problem, we start using `FloodSub` router in addition to existing `GossipSub` router.

- BNs __fan-out__(TODO Link) acknowledgement messages with the DataRoot(TODO Link or specify in glossary) hashes of the
  newly produced EDS by the Core network. The acknowledgement means "I have data, request it from me".
- FNs subscribe to these messages and apply further message processing
  - Check that the received DataRoot hash is part of any recent `ExtendedHeader`
  - Request the message sender peer(other BN/FN) for the ODS committed into the DataRoot.
    - If the peer is lying or does not respond with the data it acknowledged to have - wait for acknowledges from other peers
    - After certain period of time(TODO Define) fallback to polling discovered peers in the __full node__ subnetwork.

>   - Retransmit the message further to acknowledge connected peers.

Author: > only to directly connected peers? 

It's the goal, but we are not restricted to requesting only connected peers.

> but in real world will have diameter > 1
wdym by diameter? network degree?

> Did you consider to make FN request data from source of the message rather than from sender?

Yes, but we don't want to overload the sender. Imaging the whole network asking only one sender. But,` sender` and `source` is valid case in PubSub and thus in our logic. This means that with a small network, we will request the source, but requesting it from sender will decrease the load from sender, when network grows

>   - Retransmit the message further to acknowledge connected peers.

Reviewer 3: > wdym by diameter? network degree?

Sorry for confusion, I was referring to graph diameter. 

>  Imaging the whole network asking only one sender
I thought this issue is addressed by retransmitting only after obtaining EDS. If we consider rate-limiting approach by limiting amount of concurrent downloads, it means server side has fixed amount of slots for clients. So when FN(client) finishes download, the slot is released and becomes available. The FN could propagate info about this slot being available further to network by retransmitting same notification. And also sent notification about it being available as source as well. 

Actually if `floodSub` provides connection to more than half of the nodes in network, my suggestion won't provide any profit.

The new design drastically speeds up EDS retrieval in __happy path__ by streaming ODS as a single file and recomputing
parity data forming EDS. Similar approach is taken for ND retrieval. The main goal is to make EDS and ND retrieval
consistently outpace EDS production for the max EDS size for historical and recent EDSes.

The existing EDS retrieval logic(TODO: Link something) remains a __fallback path__, if the __happy path__ fails due to lack of connected
peers or the coordinated data withholding attack. With the __fallback path__ retrieval leverages all connected peers,
including LNs, and granulary requests EDS pieces - __shares__, increasing the likelihood of EDS reconstruction, while
paying a slower retrieval time price.

## Decision

The decision is to design three protocols:
- [`ShrEx/EDS`](#ShrEx/EDS Protocol) - Pull-based EDS retrieval protocol
- 
- [`ShrEx/ND`](#ShrEx/ND Protocol) - Pull-based ND retrieval protocol
- 
- [`ShrEx/Sub`](#ShrEx/Sub Protocol) - Push-based _notification_ protocol for the newly produced EDSes

### Key Design Decisions

- __Use [go-libp2p][go-libp2p]'s software stack to build the protocols.__ It's extensively used in `celestia-node` already,

> proven to be robust and provides all the requirRed components and tools for the new protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proven to be robust and provides all the required components and tools for the new protocols.
```

- __Use [protobuf][proto] schema for protocol(TODO Link) message (de)serialization.__ Protobuf is a common (de)serialization

> standard which is already used in celestia-node. Even thought there are better alternatives, their benefits are

Reviewer: Non blocking comment: better in what sense?

Author: Speed, size of data, determinism, not tooling

The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message EDSRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the requested EDS.
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {
  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found
  REFUSED = 201; // request refused
}

message EDSResponse {
  Status status = 1;
}
```

#### Streaming

After flushing `EDSResponse`, server starts streaming ODS file to client over the libp2p stream.

#### Backpressure

The streaming part of the protocol does not provide any mechanics for backpressure and offloads them to layer below.
Client-side buffer with reasonable default size may still be added.

[Backpressure][backpressure-quic] is inherited from the QUIC. The underlying default reliable transport and stream
multiplexing protocol used in `celestia-node`.

The common TCP transport and yamux multiplexer combination, does not provide reliable backpressure on stream level,
unlike QUIC. Therefore, using TCP+yamux is not recommended and may lead to unexpected stream and connections resets in case of highly

> congested links.

Reviewer: Q: Does the streaming only work relaibly using QUIC?

Author: I think so

congested links.

#### Flow

// TODO Make a simple sequence diagram

### ShrEx/ND Protocol

ShrEx/ND is a pull-based protocol with client-server model, where LNs are clients and BNs/FNs are servers.
The protocol has only one request-response interaction to get all the data/shares addressed by namespace

The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/nd/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message NDRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the EDS to get ND from
  bytes namespace = 2; // namespace of ND
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {
  INVALID = 0;
  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found
  REFUSED = 201; // request refused
}

message Proof {
  int64 start = 1;
  int64 end = 2;
  repeated bytes Nodes = 3;
}

message Row {
  repeated bytes shares = 3;
  Proof proof = 4;
}

message NDResponse {
  Status status = 1;
  repeated Row rows = 2;
}

```

#### Streaming

The v0 version of the protocol sends ND and supporting NMT proofs as a single message. The libp2p has a max message size

> of 1MB, meaning that the `NDResponse` message is limited with 1MB.

Reviewer: Would add a sentence why 1MB is sufficient here.

The following versions will introduce streaming by either splitting `NDResponse` into multiple messages or by streaming
data and proofs in real time, while they are read from the disk.

#### Flow

// TODO Make a simple sequence diagram

### ShrEx/Sub Protocol

`ShrEx/Sub` is push-based notification protocol with PubSub model, where LNs are subscribers, BNs are publishers and
FNs are both.

The protocol is based on libp2p's `FloodSub`(TODO Link) with `/ShrEx/sub/0.0.1` as topic ID.

#### Message Schema

The notification message with one field does not require serialization.
The notification is plain data hash bytes of the EDS.

> #### Why not GossipSub?

Reviewer: Very well written section 👏🏼

(the [fanout][gs-fanout] case is out of scope in this explanation). A new logical link is established on every new "physical" 
connection. When there are too many logical links (>DHi), random logical links are pruned. However, there is no 
differentiation between peer types, so pruning can happen to any peer.

Subsequently, with `GossipSub` any FN may prune all other BNs/FNs and end up being connected only to LNs, missing any new
EDS notifications. Additionally, `GossipSub` implements peer exchange with pruned peers, e.g. when a FN has too many links,
it may prune a LN and then send it a bunch of peers that are not guaranteed to be FNs. Therefore, the LN can similarly end
up isolated with other LNs with no ability to listen for the new EDS notifications.

The `FloodSub` on the other hand sends messages to every "physical" connection without overlay mesh of logical links,
which solves the problem with the cost of higher message duplication factor on the network. Although, moderate amount of
duplicates coming from different peers are useful in this case. If the primary message sender peer does not serve data,
the senders of duplicates are requested instead.

> In the future when the network reaches scale of ~5000 peers, we may want to design custom PubSub router in favour of basic

Author: Just an arbitrarily big number. I actually don't but would like to analyze this

Subsequently, we extend `Discovery` with the following method:

```go
// Peers provides list of discovered peers in the "full" topic.
// If Discovery haven't found any peers, it blocks until at least one peer is found.
func (d *Discovery) Peers(context.Context) ([]peer.ID, error)
```

### Full Availability

Celestia-node has central `share.Availability` interface, which guarantees certain level of EDS data availability depending
on the implementation. The `FullAvailability` implementation is responsible for checking the availability of the whole
EDS by retrieving and reconstructing it. As we're improving our EDS retrieval logic, the new __happy path__ over `ShrEx/EDS` 
protocol will be integrated in there.

## Hardening

### Rate Limiting

Both `ShrEx/EDS` and `ShrEx/ND` has a server side that serves data. To prevent trivial DOS vector rate limiting should
be introduced. Both protocols should have a configurable amount of data requests they serve at any given moment. If any 
new request exceeds the limit, the server responds with `REFUSED` status code to client, so that client can act accordingly
and try another peer.

> The alternative is to queue clients' requests and make client wait until it's request can be processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alternative is to queue clients' requests and make client wait until its request can be processed.
```

# ADR #013: Block Data Sync Overhaul: Part II - Network

## Authors

> @Wondertan @renenay

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
@Wondertan @renaynay 
```
lol

Author: Glad you passed the test😊

> > This ADR took a while to get through all the necessary details. Special thanks to awesome @renenay for dozens of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> This ADR took a while to get through all the necessary details. Special thanks to awesome @renaynay for dozens of
```
lol

                       │ <────────────────              
                    ┌──┴───┐          ┌──┴───┐          
                    │Client│          │Server│          
                    └──────┘          └──────┘          

```

### Misbehavior

* Server sends ODS CAR file that fails EDS reconstruction.
* Client terminates stream after receiving the EDSResponse.

### ShrEx/ND Protocol

ShrEx/ND is a pull-based protocol with client-server model, where LNs are clients and BNs/FNs are servers.
The protocol has only one request-response interaction to get all the data/shares addressed by namespace

The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/nd/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message NDRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the EDS to get ND from
  bytes namespace = 2; // namespace of ND
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {
  INVALID = 0;
  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found
  REFUSED = 201; // request refused
}

message Proof {
  int64 start = 1;
  int64 end = 2;
  repeated bytes Nodes = 3;
}

message Row {

>   repeated bytes shares = 3;
>   Proof proof = 4;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  repeated bytes shares = 1;
  Proof proof = 2;
```

}

message NDResponse {
  Status status = 1;
  repeated Row rows = 2;
}

```

#### Streaming

The v0 version of the protocol sends ND and supporting NMT proofs as a single message. The libp2p has a max message size
of 1MB, meaning that the `NDResponse` message is limited with 1MB.

The following versions will introduce streaming by either splitting `NDResponse` into multiple messages or by streaming
data and proofs in real time, while they are read from the disk.

#### Flow

     ┌──────┐          ┌──────┐
     │Client│          │Server│
     └──┬───┘          └──┬───┘
        │   Open Stream   │    
        │ ────────────────>    
        │                 │    
        │    NDRequest    │    
        │ ────────────────>    
        │                 │    
        │    NDResponse   │    
        │ <────────────────    
        │                 │    
        │   Stream Close  │    
        │ <────────────────    
     ┌──┴───┐          ┌──┴───┐
     │Client│          │Server│
     └──────┘          └──────┘

### ShrEx/Sub Protocol

`ShrEx/Sub` is push-based notification protocol with PubSub model, where LNs are subscribers, BNs are publishers and
FNs are both.

> The protocol is based on libp2p's `FloodSub`(TODO Link) with `/ShrEx/sub/0.0.1` as topic ID.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The protocol is based on libp2p's `FloodSub`(TODO Link) with `eds-sub` as topic ID.
```
can we be consistent with other pubsub topics?

Author: Not necessary, but good call

Author: Made it `eds-sub`, but I kept versioning

# ADR #013: Block Data Sync Overhaul: Part II - Network

## Authors

@Wondertan @renaynay

> This ADR took a while to get through all the necessary details. Special thanks to awesome @renaynay for dozens of
> deep dive calls, note-taking, thoughts, and ideas.
> Similarly, the time spent on the experiments with the format of the documents was refactored three times.

## Glossary

- LN - Light Node
- FN - Full Node
- BN - Bridge Node
- Core Network - Consensus Network of Validators/Proposers producing new Celestia Blocks
- [EDS(Extended Data Square)](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/blob/80d231f733e9dd8ca166c3d670470ed9a1c165d9/extendeddatasquare.go#L13) - plain Block
  data omitting headers and other block metadata
- ODS - Original Data Square or the first quadrant of the EDS. It contains real user data and padding
- Recent EDS - Newly produced EDS coming from the Core consensus network
- ND - Namespaced data/shares. Constitutes EDS

## Overview

> This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul design. The previous document(TODO: Link) described the design

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document is a continuation of the BlockSync Overhaul design. The [previous document](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/main/docs/adr/adr-011-blocksync-overhaul-part-1.md) described the design
```

for the storage subsystem of the new block synchronization protocol of Celestia's Data Availability network and the Part
II focuses on networking.

> The new design drastically speeds up EDS retrieval in __happy path__ by streaming ODS as a single file and recomputing
> parity data forming EDS. A similar approach is taken for ND retrieval. The main goal is to make EDS and ND retrieval
> consistently outpace EDS production for the max EDS size for historical and recent EDSes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new design drastically speeds up EDS retrieval. The main goal of the new design was to make
historical and recent EDS and ND retrieval consistently outpace EDS production for the maximum EDS
size.

In the __happy path__, only the ODS is streamed and the parity data is recomputed locally to
recreate the EDS. A similar approach is taken for ND retrieval.
```

> The existing EDS retrieval logic(TODO: Link something) remains a __fallback path__ if the __happy path__ fails due to a
> lack of connected peers or the coordinated data withholding attack. With the __fallback path__, retrieval leverages all 
> connected peers, including LNs, and granularly requests EDS pieces - __shares__, increasing the likelihood of EDS 
> reconstruction while paying a slower retrieval time price.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [existing EDS retrieval
logic](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/7cc511d74bead176e39312798e61a8c83ac2fb7f/share/eds/retriever.go)
remains as a __fallback path__ if the __happy path__ fails. This could occur due to a lack of
connected peers or a coordinated data withholding attack. With the __fallback path__, retrieval
leverages all connected peers, including LNs, and granularly requests EDS pieces - __shares__,
increasing the likelihood of EDS reconstruction while paying a slower retrieval time price.
```

## Decision

The decision is to design three protocols:
- [`ShrEx/EDS`](#shrexeds-protocol) - Pull-based EDS retrieval protocol

- [`ShrEx/ND`](#shrexnd-protocol) - Pull-based ND retrieval protocol

> - [`ShrEx/Sub`](#shrexsub-protocol) - Push-based _notification_ protocol for the newly produced EDSes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`ShrEx/Sub`](#shrexsub-protocol) - Push-based _notification_ protocol for newly produced EDSes
```

### Key Design Decisions

- __Use [go-libp2p][go-libp2p]'s software stack to build the protocols.__ It has been extensively used in `celestia-node`
  already, proven to be robust and provides all the required components and tools for the new protocols.

- __Use [protobuf][proto] schema for protocol(TODO Link) message (de)serialization.__ Protobuf is a common 
  (de)serialization standard used in celestia-node. Even though there are better alternatives in speed, encoding
  footprint, and determinism, their benefits are negligible compared with continuing Protobuf usage for consistency and 
  simplicity.

> - __FN/LNs keep existing EDS retrieval logic(TODO Link?).__ `celestia-node` already provides means to get EDS from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- __FN/LNs keep [existing EDS retrieval logic]((https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/7cc511d74bead176e39312798e61a8c83ac2fb7f/share/eds/retriever.go).__ `celestia-node` already provides means to get EDS from
```

  the network. It is slower than block production for the EDS sizes __>128__ but has higher retrieval guarantees during
  data withholding attacks. (link)

> - __FN/LN/BNs leverage implemented discovery mechanism outlined in ADR-008(TODO Link).__ The discovery in a node 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- __FN/LN/BNs leverage the implemented discovery mechanism outlined in [ADR-008](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/main/docs/adr/adr-008-p2p-discovery.md).__ The discovery in a node 
```

>   maintains connections with FN-subnetwork. The mechanism ensures the node will receive new notifications from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  maintains connections with the FN-subnetwork. The mechanism ensures the node will receive new notifications from 
```

  `ShrEx/Sub` and can request data via `ShrEx/EDS` and `ShrEx/ND`.

- __FN/BNs notify connected LN/FNs when they are ready to serve a recent EDS using via [`ShrEx/Sub`](#ShrEx/Sub 
  Protocol).__ The push notification means, "I have this data; request it from me." This lazy-push approach provides 
  reliable EDS dissemination properties and is simpler than technics similar to Bitswap's want list.(TODO link)

## Protocols Specs

### ShrEx/EDS Protocol

ShrEx/EDS is a pull-based protocol with a client-server model, where LNs are clients, BNs are servers, and FNs are both. 
The protocol has only one request-response interaction followed by the ODS stream, which then reconstructs into EDS.

The protocol is designed over plain libp2p streams with `/shrex/eds/0.0.1` as the protocol ID.

#### Protobuf Schema

##### Request

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message EDSRequest {
  bytes hash = 1; // identifies the requested EDS.
}
```

##### Response

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

enum Status {

>   INVALID = 0;

Reviewer 2: In what condition will a server respond with invalid?

  OK = 100; // data found
  NOT_FOUND = 200; // data not found
  REFUSED = 201; // request refused
}

message EDSResponse {
  Status status = 1;
}
```

#### Streaming

> After flushing `EDSResponse`, a server starts streaming an ODS as a CAR file (TODO link) to a client over a libp2p 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After flushing `EDSResponse`, a server starts streaming an [ODS reader](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/7cc511d74bead176e39312798e61a8c83ac2fb7f/share/eds/ods.go#L16-L24) from a local [CAR file](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/blob/7cc511d74bead176e39312798e61a8c83ac2fb7f/share/eds/store.go#L177-L190) to a client over a libp2p 
```

                       │    EDSRequest   │              
                       │ ────────────────>              
                       │                 │              
                       │   EDSResponse   │              
                       │ <────────────────              
                       │                 │              
                       │                 │              
          ╔══════╤═════╪═════════════════╪═════════════╗
          ║ ALT  │  STATUS:OK            │             ║
          ╟──────┘     │                 │             ║
          ║            │     CAR File    │             ║
          ║            │ <────────────────             ║
          ╚════════════╪═════════════════╪═════════════╝
                       │                 │              
                       │   Stream Close  │              
                       │ <────────────────              
                    ┌──┴───┐          ┌──┴───┐          
                    │Client│          │Server│          
                    └──────┘          └──────┘          

```

### Misbehavior

* Server sends ODS CAR file that fails EDS reconstruction.

> * Client terminates stream after receiving the EDSResponse.

Reviewer 2: Why would this be a misbehavior @Wondertan ? Can you help me understand why it matters who closes the stream ?

data and proofs in real-time while they are read from the disk.

#### Flow

     ┌──────┐          ┌──────┐
     │Client│          │Server│
     └──┬───┘          └──┬───┘
        │   Open Stream   │    
        │ ────────────────>    
        │                 │    
        │    NDRequest    │    
        │ ────────────────>    
        │                 │    
        │    NDResponse   │    
        │ <────────────────    
        │                 │    
        │   Stream Close  │    
        │ <────────────────    
     ┌──┴───┐          ┌──┴───┐
     │Client│          │Server│
     └──────┘          └──────┘

### ShrEx/Sub Protocol

`ShrEx/Sub` is a push-based notification protocol with the publish-subscribe model, where LNs are subscribers, BNs are 
publishers and FNs are both.

The protocol is based on libp2p's `FloodSub`(TODO Link) with `/eds-sub/0.0.1` as the topic ID.

#### Message Schema

The notification message with one field does not require serialization.
The notification is plain data hash bytes of the EDS.

#### Why not GossipSub?

In celestia-node, we extensively use libp2p's `GossipSub` router, which provides bandwidth-efficient yet secure message

> dissemination over Celestia's DA p2p network. However, it does not fit well in the Recent EDS use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dissemination over Celestia's DA p2p network. However, it is not well suited for exchanging recent EDSes.
```
